the girag and experience now how did you
get involved in this you started you
said 24 years ago doing drug research on
animals how did what was what led you to
want to go down this road so I was in I
tell the story in the book and so I was
in the Air Force
back in the 80s like you mentioned about
crack cocaine so I was in the Air Force
over in England 86 87 88 and crack
cocaine was a big deal in the United
States as you point out and I grew up in
the hood in Miami and Miami was a
cocaine capital in the United States and
and so things that were happening in my
community that were not good high
unemployment crime all of these kinds of
things
I blame crack cocaine for that and so I
thought that if I go to school and get a
degree in order to study drugs the
effects of drugs on the brain I could
solve the problems that face my
community or problems that I thought
were in the community particularly those
related to drugs and so I began studying
drugs as an undergraduate and then went
on to graduate school to study drugs on
the brains of animals and to try to
figure out the neurobiological
mechanisms that were responsible for
addiction she just got fascinated by
this idea of fixing this issue that you
saw in your community and then you just
fell into a rabbit hole yeah so when I
started along my journey my path I
actually got in education and you know
so as James Baldwin said you know the
the paradox of education is precisely
this as one begins to become educated
and conscious one begins to question the
society in which he's being educated and
that's what happened with me and so
along the way I discovered things like
hmm the majority of people who use these
drugs are not addicted that was one
thing I discovered I discovered that
many of the things that we said about
crack about crack cocaine were just
simply not true like the cold crack baby
myths and people said that when that our
generation beep should be prepared to
have an army of kids who couldn't learn
because of being exposed to crack
cocaine that just simply wasn't true
when all the data came out there
beginning in the mid-1990s we realized
that that simply wasn't true
other things that I learned that just
simply wasn't true things like one hit
of crack cocaine you're addicted not
true that crack cocaine was different
from powder cocaine not true all of
these things I discovered of long way
that they won't they weren't true and
not only that I discovered that this
wasn't new I went back to the early
1900s and saw the same sort of hysteria
mainly race-based hysteria surrounding
drugs occurred even then and so I
thought what's what's going on and then
that helped me to be more critical about
my issue is there a difference in the
the effect of crack cocaine the physical
effect and and and cocaine and heroin so
let's think about crack let me not not
here on rather how to conquer powder
yeah let's think about crack cocaine and
powder cocaine let's just think about
the chemical structure the only
difference between crack cocaine and
powder cocaine is that the powder
cocaine has this thing called the
hydrochloride salt attached to it that
salt prevents it from being smoked
now you can dissolve the powder cocaine
and in water and in shooting in your arm
and so you have the effects of cocaine
the onset of the effects within seconds
the same is true with crack cocaine the
effects are onset of a sex effects are
within seconds now the biological
activity of cocaine is at the base not
that so that hydrochloride portion on
the on the cocaine powder on the powder
cocaine has no biological activity
whereas so that means that crack and
powder are the same drug they are
exactly the same drug the same effect
same drug Wow so it's indistinguishable
to the user indistinguishable now why is
it that they prepare it that way like
what's the benefit of preparing it it's
just so delivery quicker great question
so one of the things that you you might
recall Richard Pryor back in the days
when he got he burnt and he burnt
himself with smoking so he was
freebasing
and so he was removing that
hydrochloride portion of the salt off of
the off of the cocaine base so he could
actually smoke it now he was using ether
which
is highly flammable with crack cocaine
you don't now you no longer need the
ether you just mix it up with baking
soda and water and the cocaine and you
mix it up and you get rid of that salt
so ether is no longer needed and it's
not as dangerous so that's one of the
reasons that we have crack cocaine as a
result of that and it also it made it so
you could sell them in unit doses to
make the drug appear to be cheaper
because you also might recall in the
early 1980s 1970s you had to buy cocaine
powder in bulk and that made it more
expensive crack cocaine made it a lot
more simple simple for people to buy it
who didn't have the kind of a expendable
income that was required before the mid
1980 so essentially they just brought it
down to bite sized portions that's right
exactly
rather than selling this whole six-pack
or 12-pack now you can sell one item one
can or one bottle I want to talk more
about this but I should just clarify the
Richard Pryor changed his story as he
got older and actually said that he
tried to kill himself he lit himself on
fire apparently I'm a huge Richard Pryor
fan and I know that that was originally
what he had said that he got burnt doing
freebase but I think he changed his
story later I actually worked with him a
bunch of times right before he died was
a real honor he's a real special dude as
far as stand-up comedians go yeah with
you but that that um style of like
freebase was a thing that we'd always
associated with people that were really
really fucked up yeah like the guys
doing coke oh well you know he's
probably gonna mess up his life he's
freebasing
oh shit yeah he's gone man he's based
and he's a basehead yeah right base head
was the thing before crack I was lace
heads absolutely I described a cup of
people in the book from my neighborhood
who got into freebasing in exactly the
same way you just talked about right
absolutely
um now everybody has this idea in their
head that crime and that everything
escalated in the world changed when
crack was introduced is that a myth as
well yeah it's a myth well what let me
clarify because on the one hand so when
crack hit the market its first sort of
talked about December 1984 in the LA
Times the first time we heard a crack
but it didn't become more widely known
or available until maybe the mid
nineteen mid nineteen eighty-five
now once crack cocaine hit the markets
what happened was that people were
fighting over various new markets
whenever there are new illicit markets
yeah you're going to get some violent
activities until the market settles down
that happened with any illicit market
and that certainly happened with crack
cocaine now one of the things that
people there are a number of things that
people attributed to crack in terms of
crime and all of the sort of downfall of
certain communities unemployment they
said that unemployment really rose as a
result of crack cocaine being around now
nineteen eighty two the unemployment
rate in this country was about 11
percent for white folks and it was
double that for black people
that was before crack at least two three
years before crack even hit the market
now doing the whole crack era
unemployment has never been as high as
1982 that's number one people said
things like people from my community
crack cocaine what's responsible for
these mothers these grandmothers now
raising new generations of kids because
their daughters were strung out on crack
and so now they have to take care of
these kids that simply wasn't true it
certainly happened in in my community
but it happened before crack cocaine was
ever on the mark and certainly happened
in my family long before crack cocaine
ever hit the market when we look at
other communities like particularly
immigrant community if you look at the
Jewish community when they came over to
Eastern European Jews when they came
over in the country there early nineteen
hundred eight or 1800s and so forth what
you see is that you had a similar sort
of phenomenon going on in those kind of
communities what's his name urban how
his great book land of our fathers a
home of our fathers he kind of described
all of these pathological behaviors that
happened in that community many of those
same behaviors were attributed to crack
cocaine and black people later but it's
not it they were there long before crack
cocaine was there but crack cocaine
became the scapegoat
that's a fascinating scapegoat because I
bought into it hook line and sinker I
really thought that there was a
difference between the 1980s and the
1990s as far as like when crack was
introduced boom it took off it was sort
of something that was just always
discussed as like common fact ya know I
bought into it too and that's what drove
me to pursue my education in the way I
did but as a result of pursuing that
education I discovered that it was not
true
so are these cultural myths the result
of politician like political campaigns
we're trying to clean up the streets and
they attributed to certain issues or is
it is it as something more widespread is
it the media just running with a
narrative what it what is it how did it
get started well there are multiple sort
of factors and players involved so when
we think about the politicians for
example politicians if crack cocaine is
the problem never mind the fact that
unemployment rates was out of control
before crack cocaine hit the market hit
the market unemployment was out of
control a number of things were already
problematic now you have crack cocaine
if you blame crack cocaine it's really
easy to simply say we'll put more law
enforcement we'll hire more cops we'll
put more efforts in controlling these
drugs a lot easier to say will lock
people up for selling these drugs for
using these drugs in the process what
you do is you create jobs for a select
group of people and then you don't have
to deal with the real issues the real
issues of unemployment of deprivation
all of these things you don't have to
deal with they're far more complicated
and so politicians are happy to buy in
now one of the things about crack
cocaine is that we think about the law
that punishes or punished crack cocaine
a hundred times more harshly than powder
cocaine and the vast majority of people
who got punished under these laws were
black eighty eighty-five percent of the
people even though they don't make up
the majority of the users so people say
things like well were those laws racist
and the laws themselves weren't racist
because the blood Congressional Black
Caucus 17 of the 21 members voted to for
these laws for these laws that punish
crack cocaine a hundred times more
harshly but the
point is is that everyone bought into it
parents bought into it because the
parents did for the parents what this
meant is that you don't actually have to
educate your kids about this you just
say that they're bad and stay away from
it no education require even sciences
and treatment providers they all bought
into it because you got a problem we're
going to solve your problem so we are
needed and we are valued all so you had
all of these sort of constituencies from
society benefiting from the vilification
or the scapegoating of crack cocaine all
of those things didn't came together
nicely and then we think about the
rappers they all came into the game too
because it's like I'm conscious I'm
going to say that this is a problem my
community and I care about my community
and this is the way that I can show it
so everybody had a stake in this sort of
thing Wow that is absolutely fascinating
you know one of the things that I've
talked to quite a few people about when
it comes to issues like real complex
issues like drug addiction and and
violence and in poverty is that once you
feed it with any organism whether it's
that what organism is law enforcement or
that organism is education
whichever one you feed is the one that's
going to grow and once you feed the law
enforcement one and you look at this
really complex situation I think law
enforcement is important but I think
education is probably more important to
avoid future law enforcement like the
more I think the more education we have
the the more nuanced our ability to
raise children is the more we understand
you know that we're all in this together
the less you're going to need law
enforcement but when law enforcement
becomes this machine that lobbies
against the legalization of certain
drugs which when you start looking at
the data there's only one reason to do
that and the only reason is that you're
trying to stay alive you're trying to
grow your an organism you're trying
trying to eat the sugar you're trying to
keep going so you're creating more jobs
by putting people in jail it's
essentially no one wants to look at it
like this but it's a form of slavery I
think we in the house I live in the film
Eugene Drake ease film I think that's
the kind of analogy he was trying to
draw in that film absolutely so
I think we get it I think a number of
people get that that's exactly what it
is
you